---
id: d70cb747-6ab6-4bcd-9805-884f79be3893
type: lecture
created: 2025-11-09
updated: 2025-11-09
title: Setup, draw and programme flow
lesson: Lesson 2.1 Drawing Functions
unit: Topic 1. Your development environment (cont.)
course: CM1005 Introduction to Programming I
certificate: BSc Computer Science
url: https://www.coursera.org/learn/uol-introduction-to-programming-1/lecture/G9VO3/setup-draw-and-programme-flow
tags:
aliases:
related:
---

# Introduction

Hi, in this video, we're going to be looking in a bit more detail at the parts of your program. We're also going to look at the program flow—how your program is executed from beginning to end.

# Downloading and Examining the Sketch

To start with, I've downloaded the sketch that you can find right beneath this video. In it, you'll see some basic code that you should already be quite familiar with. We've got the Canvas command in the `setup` function, and then there's some drawing taking place in the `draw` function. 

We will get into exactly what these functions are in a couple of weeks' time. For now, just know that these are two blocks of code that will be executed as part of your program.

# Live Preview and Function Execution

If we click on the live preview, we should hopefully see two squares being drawn to the screen, in two different colors.

Now, let's take a look at how these parts of the program are executed. As you might have guessed, the `setup` function is executed at the start of your program, before the `draw` function is called. When `setup` has been completed, `draw` is then called repeatedly once every frame.

You may know what I mean by "frame" from film or animation, which is just a series of still images played together progressively over time to create the illusion of movement. Your browser does exactly the same thing. Every time `draw` is called, it creates a new frame of the program.

# Order of Execution

Besides the order in which these functions are called, we also need to understand the order in which the individual lines of code are executed. Happily, this is quite easy—they are executed from top to bottom, just like lines of text in a book.

While this doesn't seem too complicated, if you get it wrong you can have unexpected behavior, and things might not look the way you expect them to. Let me change this program around so you can see a bit more about what I mean.

For example, instead of two squares overlapping one another, imagine if they were drawn directly over the top of each other, and the first was a little smaller than the second. Now, if I switch these two squares around and return them to the way they were originally (and tidy up my indenting), we can see the two squares back as we expected them to be.

# Using Alpha for Transparency

One other trick you can try, thinking back to one of Simon's earlier videos, is to set an alpha channel on one of these color values, which will make it slightly see-through.

Using this example again, we just add an alpha value of about 100 to the blue square. This is going to make it about halfway transparent. So, if we save this and look at the sketch, the blue square now looks purple, because it's a combination of half of the blue color and the red color shining through beneath it.
