---
id: 3361b9d8-67d3-4243-ac4e-383381da4da0
type: lecture
created: 2025-11-09
updated: 2025-11-09
title: Sleuth - important information
lesson: Lesson 1.2 Introduction to Sleuth
unit: Topic 1. Your development environment (cont.)
course: CM1005 Introduction to Programming I
certificate: BSc Computer Science
url: https://www.coursera.org/learn/uol-introduction-to-programming-1/supplement/0fa5y/sleuth-important-information
tags:
  - p5js
aliases:
related:
---

## Introduction to Sleuth

In the next video, the instructor will introduce you to Sleuth, an engaging and educational activity designed to teach you the fundamentals of programming. As you embark on this adventure, you will step into the role of a private investigator working for the Sleuth and Co detective agency. Your primary mission will be to solve code crimes, which are systematically arranged into various cases, using your programming skills. Throughout your journey, the chief will provide guidance and keep you on track.

---

## Key Points to Remember

### Formative Activity

Sleuth is a formative tool, meaning it will not directly affect your grades. However, completing all the puzzles is highly recommended. It serves as a crucial learning experience for grasping the basics of programming. Additionally, we might ask you to discuss one of the crime puzzles as part of your project submission for this module.

### Access Points

There are two main entry points to access Sleuth in this module:

- **Week 2: Rookie mode**  
  This is where you will begin your journey as a novice investigator.

- **Week 12: Pro mode**  
  Once you have gained more experience, you can tackle more advanced cases.

While both the rookie and pro cases are available at any time, we suggest you complete them as outlined in the course schedule to ensure a structured learning progression.

### Tools for Coding

To solve the puzzles, you can use either Brackets or Visual Studio Code. However, we recommend using Visual Studio Code due to its modern and robust features.

---

Happy sleuthing!
