---
id: e7f86706-f05e-4d03-9d6d-79f83276fa81
type: lecture
created: 2025-11-09
updated: 2025-11-09
title: Introduction to Sleuth
lesson: Lesson 1.2 Introduction to Sleuth
unit: Topic 1. Your development environment (cont.)
course: CM1005 Introduction to Programming I
certificate: BSc Computer Science
url: https://www.coursera.org/learn/uol-introduction-to-programming-1/lecture/MqFMq/introduction-to-sleuth
tags:
  - p5js
aliases:
related:
---

## Getting Started with the Sleuth App

Okay, so I've got the Sleuth App opened already. You can find that at the top of your Coursera page as well. Once you've got it opened, you're going to see three options:

- **"How am I doing?"**  
  If you click on this, you can see what your current score is and how many cases you've attempted and so on.

- **"About Sleuth"**  
  This gives you just some general information about the game.

- **"Let's solve some crimes"**  
  This is the one we're going to look at now.

When I click on "Let's solve some crimes," I can see all the cases that are available for me to solve. At the moment, the only case that's available here is **case 101: The Case of Lina Lovelace**. When you do this, you'll actually see more cases available than that. But we're just going to start with this one, and we're going to start with the first stage: **Central Station**.

You can see there are actually four stages here. However, we can't attempt the later stages until we've solved Central Station. So, I'm going to click on it, and now we can see that there's a button to download our crime.

## Downloading and Preparing Your Case

I'm going to download it, and you should get a zip file, probably either on your desktop or in your downloads folder. My download appeared in the downloads folder.

The next thing to do is to unzip that file:
- **Mac**: Just double-click the file.
- **Windows**: It should be simple to extract, and you won’t need any proprietary software.

Once the folder is unzipped, you'll notice that it's just a regular p5.js sketch, like the other sketches you've been working with.

The next step is to open the sketch in the Brackets editor. **Remember to drag the whole folder in**—don’t try to open just the `sketch.js` file, or else you won’t be able to run the code.

## Exploring the Sketch

Once I have the folder loaded and am looking at the `sketch.js` file, the first thing you might notice is there is an officer written here. My one has this name, but you'll have something else written there, and a case number.

**It's really important that you don't delete this text or modify it in any way.** This is the text that Sleuth uses in order to grade your code.

Next, you’ll see some instructions. These instructions tell us a bit of story, but they also tell us what we need to do. In this case, we need to **draw a rectangle around the image of Lina Lovelace**.

If I look at the image that's part of this package, we've got `image.jpeg`. I can see Lina Lovelace standing in the middle of the scene, and I'm going to need to draw a rectangle around her.

Looking back at the instructions, it says the rectangle should **surround Lina as accurately as possible without including anything else.** I'll need to get this rectangle as close to the edges of the drawing as I can.

It also instructs me what commands to use—in this case, the `rect` command.

So, I'm going to run the sketch and see what we've got so far. At this point, I can just see the image.

## Drawing the Rectangle Around Lina Lovelace

Next, I'm going to try to draw the rectangle around Lina Lovelace.

There's a really useful tool in the Brackets editor:  
If I click on the image and move my mouse over, I can see the X and Y coordinates of where the mouse is. This will help me get my rectangle accurate very quickly.

So, I carefully choose this point—let's say X is 432, and Y is 163. **Note:** When you do this puzzle, your coordinates will be different.

I'll remember these coordinates: **432, 163.**

Now, I use the `rect` command that you've just learned.  
- For the X parameter, I put 432.
- For the Y parameter, I put 163.

That puts the top left-hand corner of the rectangle in the right place, but I don't know yet what the size should be. I'll take a guess:
- Width: 100
- Height: 200

I save my sketch and see how it updates. Now, I can see a rectangle, but it's definitely not wide enough.

I'll try making the width 150.  
That's wide enough, but not tall enough, so I'll try height 300.

Now I've surrounded Lina Lovelace. I'm not sure whether it's accurate enough yet, but I'm going to give it a go.

## Submitting Your Solution

I'm going to upload my sketch and see whether it gets accepted.

To do this:
- Go to select the `sketch.js` file
- Click "Browse"
- Navigate to your project and select the `sketch.js`
- If that's right, you should see the case number appear in the window

Click "Submit Solution" and your code will be graded.

It tells me that I correctly identified Lina Lovelace. That was accurate enough, and I got 100%. That's great! I can continue, and I get a message from the chief. I pass the first stage, and now I'm told not to let her out of my sight. Let's see where she heads next.

Now, I can see that the Central Station stage has been solved. I could go back and try that again for fun if I wanted, but now I'm on to the next stage: **Smalltalk Speakeasy.**

## Stage Two: Smalltalk Speakeasy

I'm just going to show you a little bit of this stage before I leave you to it.

So, I download the crime. Once it's downloaded, I unzip the sketch again. Just as before, it's a basic p5.js sketch. All the puzzles will be like this.

I go to the Brackets editor, carefully drag the whole folder in there, and open up the sketch.

Now, I'm on stage two of the Smalltalk Speakeasy. I can read the story and find more instructions:

- First, I have to identify **Lina by drawing a rectangle with a blue outline around her**. This is a little bit harder.
- Then, I have to identify the **woman with the cigarette and the feathered hat** by drawing a rectangle with a green outline around her.

**Note:** This puzzle will not be exactly the same as the one you get to solve. It will be very similar, but the positions and colors of the outlines may be different. I have two commands I can use: `rect` and `stroke`.

I'm going to get started, but I’m not going to get the whole way through this one. Let’s have a look.

I can see the woman with the cigarette and Lina Lovelace.

I think I'm going to start with the woman with the cigarette. I try to get all of her in the rectangle.

Let's say X is 143 and Y is 518.  
I enter `rect` with X 413 and Y 518, and make it 100 by 100 because I'm not sure what the size should be.

I check my work and notice my rectangle is in quite the wrong place. I go back and measure the image again.

It should be X 135, that's a much better number. I change it and have another look.

Now, I can see I've only just captured the cigarette. I'm just going to do one more bit and then show you some of the marking feedback.

Let's change the stroke color. The sketch asked for a green outline.

I go `stroke(0, 255, 0);` (red value 0, green 255, blue 0). Now, I have a green rectangle, that's correct.

## Checking Feedback and Submission Attempts

Even though I know this isn't right, I'll upload it to the Sleuth App so you can see what happens.

- Back in Sleuth, I browse for the right `sketch.js` file (make sure it's the correct one or it won't work)
- Submit the solution

Sleuth tells us that we've partially identified the woman with the hat and the cigarette. We haven’t identified Lina Lovelace, and the rectangle for the woman with the hat and cigarette is too small, which is obvious here.

So, there are still improvements to make. Sleuth also gives us a percentage for how complete we are on the crime. So far it thinks we've done about 40% of solving this crime.

Now, it’s up to me to continue and improve, but I’ll let you do that yourselves.

### Note on Attempt Limits

You can see that I have only **four attempts remaining**. If you use all your attempts before solving the crime, the chief will tell you you’re getting obsessed with the case and will stop you from solving it for a little while, just to give you a break. If you come back to it a day later, you’ll be able to try again.

Also, if I look at "How am I doing?", I can see my score has gone up, and there's some information in the statistics.

---

Okay, so now it’s your turn. I hope you enjoy it!
