---
id: 49c3cdbf-2b10-403a-a956-b96bf6d723db
type: lecture
created: 2025-11-09
updated: 2025-11-09
title: Sleuth case 101
lesson: Lesson 1.2 Introduction to Sleuth
unit: Topic 1. Your development environment (cont.)
course: CM1005 Introduction to Programming I
certificate: BSc Computer Science
url: https://www.coursera.org/learn/uol-introduction-to-programming-1/lecture/HCSFM/sleuth-case-101
tags:
  - p5js
aliases:
related:
---

# Getting Started with Case 101: The Case of Lina Lovelace

In this video, I'm going to show you how to get started with Case 101: The case of Lina Lovelace. We'll begin with the first stage, which is called **Central Stations**.

## Opening the Case

Here I am on the Sleuth and Co Crime's page. First, I click on **Central Station**. The next step is to download a crime:  
- Click to download  
- Open the file in the Finder  
- Unzip the file

Now, I need to open this project in Brackets. To do this, I take the whole folder and drag it into the left bar in Brackets.

## Inspecting the Project

I look for the `sketch.js` file. That's where I can see the instructions for how to solve this crime. According to the file, a well-known impresario suspects their star, Lina Lovelace, is involved with some no-good unsavory characters. What we've got to do is trail her and identify who she meets.

To trail her, we need to **draw a rectangle around her** using the image provided.

## Finding Lina in the Image

Looking at the image, we can see Lina standing at the railway station. The task is to draw a rectangle around her.

The instructions tell us to use the `rect` command to do this, and specifically, to include this inside the `draw` function below a particular comment. The first thing we need is the coordinates for the **top-left corner** of Lina.

In Brackets, there's a useful tool:  
When viewing an image, we see crosshairs that show the **xy coordinates** of the mouse position.

## Determining the Rectangle Coordinates and Size

If I move my mouse to the top-left point of Lina, I see that the rectangle should start at position **(18, 195)**.

So, in my sketch, I type: `rect(18, 195)`.  
For now, I'll make the rectangle `100 by 100`. I know that's not correct, but I want to see if it starts in the right place. I run my sketch by pressing the live preview button. I can see the rectangle, but it's way too small.

If I were to upload this, I wouldn't get full marks. Sleuth would tell me that my rectangle is too small. So, I need to get the size right.

## Adjusting the Rectangle

To get all of Lina inside, I double the width:  
- Change to `200` wide  
It's a little bit wide, but that's fine for now.

Next, I think it should be `400` high. Trying that, I see the rectangle is now too big. Let's trim it down. I try `180` for width.  
Now, it looks more accurate, but the rectangle is a bit long. For better accuracy, I try `375` for the height.  

I am now relatively happy with the result.

## Submitting Your Solution

Upload the sketch to see if the grader is happy:

- Click the browse button
- Select `sketch.js`

You can see the case number—this means it has worked. Submit your solution.

**Brilliant! We solved the case. We correctly identified Lina Lovelace.**

The chief will tell us that we passed the first stage. "Don't let her out of your sight. But don't let her see you." Next, let's see where she heads.

If you've solved this, you can move on to **Small Talk Speakeasy**. That's how to get started with Case 101.

**Now it's your turn!**
