---
id: ec40ea73-2a8d-4292-9675-640e4fcc2f1e
type: lecture
created: 2025-11-09
updated: 2025-11-09
title: Sleuth case 101 - Visual Studio Code
lesson: Lesson 1.2 Introduction to Sleuth
unit: Topic 1. Your development environment (cont.)
course: CM1005 Introduction to Programming I
certificate: BSc Computer Science
url: https://www.coursera.org/learn/uol-introduction-to-programming-1/lecture/QPi7r/sleuth-case-101-visual-studio-code
tags:
  - p5js
aliases:
related:
---


# Sleuth Case 101 - Visual Studio Code

Hello. Great to see you again. This lecture is very similar to the previous one, but instead of using the Brackets coding editor, we will use Visual Studio Code. Here's a quick overview for this lecture:

- We will get started with Sleuth and Visual Studio Code.
- We will download and inspect case 101 from the Sleuth application.
- We'll run the code, solve it using Visual Studio Code, and finally upload the result on the Sleuth application for feedback.

## Starting with Sleuth and Visual Studio Code

Let's jump into the Sleuth application together. As you can see, I am on the home page of the Sleuth application. The first thing you want to do is click on **"Let's solve some crimes,"** and we're going to solve the very first case of the series: 101, called "central station." If you click on it, you may notice that I have already solved this puzzle, but I'm going to do it again with you – because why not? It's fun.

## Downloading and Unzipping the Case

Click on **"Download crime"** first. This will download a zip file containing all the necessary elements to solve this puzzle. Locate the zip file on your computer and unzip it.

With Visual Studio Code open, simply drag the unzipped folder inside the application. This will open the folder in Visual Studio Code.

## Inspecting Case Files

Let's briefly inspect the files:

- There is an image of a lady, which we will use to solve the crime.
- There is the usual `index.html` file containing the skeleton of the web page.
- The P5 JS library file is included, containing all the functionalities of the P5 JS library.
- Most importantly, there is the `sketch.js` file – this is the actual crime that we have to solve.

As before, you will see a prompt to trust the authors of the folder. You can go ahead and do that by clicking **"Yes, I trust the authors."**

## Solving the Puzzle

The idea for this puzzle is to draw a rectangle around a person called Anna using the `rect` function. The next step is to run this case. As you learned from the previous lecture, you can do this easily using the Live Server extension.

Click on the **"Go Live"** button at the bottom of the page to load the sketch into your browser.

## Drawing the Rectangle

Now, you should see the image of the lady, and your task is to draw a rectangle around her body.

A handy feature in the sketch is that as you move your mouse around, you can see the x and y coordinates. We want to start our rectangle from the top left-hand corner of Anna. The coordinates would be around **70 pixels across** and **45 pixels down**, so remember: 70, 45.

Back in the `sketch.js` file, where you see the message "write your code below here," you are going to write the `rect` function with these initial coordinates (70, 45).

The next two parameters in the function specify how wide and how tall your rectangle should be. As an initial guess, use **100 pixels wide** and **400 pixels long**. Save the sketch:

- If you're using a Mac, press **Command + S**.
- If you're on Windows, press **Control + S**.
- Or you can click **"File"** at the top and **"Save."**

## Adjusting the Rectangle

After saving, go back and look at the browser. You may notice the rectangle is too long. Adjust the dimensions to make it a little wider and shorter – try **120 pixels wide** and **350 pixels long**. If it is still not right, adjust further: try **125 pixels wide** and **reduce the height** to perhaps **250 pixels**.

Once you are satisfied with the result, you have a decent attempt.

## Uploading the Solution

Now let’s upload this back to the Sleuth application. Go to the Sleuth website and click on **"Browse."** Select the `sketch.js` file you want to upload (mine was inside the Downloads folder), and click **"Open."** When you see it has been uploaded, click on **"Submit solution."**

After submitting, you should see a **100%** score – Happy days! You did it. That's how you can solve Sleuth puzzles using Visual Studio Code.

## Wrapping Up

Back to the slides for a quick wrap-up. In this lecture, you learned how to solve Sleuth puzzles using Visual Studio Code.

I recommend using Visual Studio Code from now on, because it's a modern coding editor and the one you will be using for other modules in your degree. Go ahead and solve as many Sleuth puzzles as you can – they are very important for teaching you the basics and core concepts of programming.

Have fun, and solve more Sleuth puzzles!
