---
id: ec40ea73-2a8d-4292-9675-640e4fcc2f1e
type: lecture
created: 2025-11-09
updated: 2025-11-09
title: Code philosophy - what it feels like to code
lesson: Lesson 1.3 Code Philosophy
unit: Topic 1. Your development environment (cont.)
course: CM1005 Introduction to Programming I
certificate: BSc Computer Science
url: https://www.coursera.org/learn/uol-introduction-to-programming-1/lecture/WSaFQ/code-philosophy-what-it-feels-like-to-code
tags:
  - p5js
aliases:
related:
---

# Code Philosophy: What It Feels Like to Code

## Frustration: The First Emotion

This week's code philosophy is about what it feels like to code. The first emotion you might experience is frustration. That's because coders spend most of their time dealing with things that don't work. In the movies, coding is portrayed as fast, but it's far from it. Grand Theft Auto took more than a thousand people three and a half years to create. It would take an individual 40 years to do it by themselves. In the games industry, 18-hour days are quite common.

## The Myth of Fast and Easy Coding

You might be thinking, “But people said coding is fast. Coding is simple. Coding is easy.” They showed you hackathons, fancy graphics, robots. So you might be thinking to yourself, “Am I stupid for finding this so difficult?” And the answer is no. Let's face it—coding is hard, but it's okay. Don't despair.

## The Addictive Nature of Coding

Coding is also highly addictive. Coders seem to love their jobs. So, why is that? Well, coders feel empowered. They build their own machines. They teach themselves new skills all the time, and they have a unique insight into how the world works.

## The Optimism and Patience of Coders

Coders are also optimists. They always assume that they can solve a problem, and they almost always do. When they can't, they work around it. So, coding is something of an act of faith. Coders don't get frustrated with problems—they master a zen-like patience. They view each problem as an opportunity to learn. Time spent solving a problem is never time wasted.

## Flow: The Emotional State of Coding

The best concept I can think of to summarize the emotional state of a coder is **flow**. Musicians are often said to be in flow when they're performing and practicing. Flow is a psychological concept in which you feel intensely focused on the present. You feel mastery over your actions and experience the shortening of time. You feel intrinsically rewarded by what you’re doing, and coders do the same.

Here’s a quote from Vikram Chandra:

> "The work making software gave me a little jolt of joy each time a piece of code worked. When something wasn't working the world fell away. My body vanished and time receded. Three or five hours later, when the piece of the problem came together and clicked into a solution, I served a swelling wave of endorphins."

## The Mantra: Code in Flow

So, the mantra for this week's code philosophy is: **code in flow**.
