---
id: 1fed9954-7304-4136-9721-af1aa120066a
type: lecture
created: 2025-11-09
updated: 2025-11-09
title: What is programming? What is p5.js?
lesson: Lesson 1.1 Introduction to p5.js
unit: Topic 1. Your development environment
course: CM1005 Introduction to Programming I
certificate: BSc Computer Science
url: https://www.coursera.org/learn/uol-introduction-to-programming-1/lecture/T1nL0/what-is-programming-what-is-p5-js
tags:
  - p5js
aliases:
related:
---

# Introduction to Programming and p5.js

We're going to look at the most basic parts of a program and introduce the language we'll be using in this course.

## What Are Commands?

Commands are the smallest building blocks of your program—a single instruction to the computer to perform an action. For example, that might be a command to draw something on the screen, to store some data, or even a command that decides which command to run next.  
A program is a collection of these individual commands put together in the right order to solve a problem, complete a task, or interact with the user. The collection of commands you write for your program is called source code, or simply **code**. Writing a program is the process of entering commands and saving them to a file on the computer.

## Precision in Programming

It's important that our commands are exactly correct and that they are in the right order. Unlike in a human language, where we can express ourselves and how we feel, programming languages are not flexible. We have to be very precise in specifying exactly what we want the code to do.

## Code Editors

You write your programs in an application called a **code editor**. Unlike a standard word processor or text editor, a code editor helps you write code by making suggestions and spotting errors. There are many code editors out there, but for this course, we are going to use the **Brackets Editor**. Simon is going to show you how to use Brackets in the next video.

## Running Your Program

When we've finished writing our program—or, more likely, written enough to test what we've done so far—we can run it. Sometimes running a program is called **executing**. If you use Windows, you might know that programs end in `.exe`, which is short for **executable**. With the code you write in this course, executing it is as easy as clicking a button in Brackets to launch your web browser. In other programming languages you might have tried, things can be more complicated.

## Programming Languages

A programming language sets the vocabulary for the commands we can use in our programs. When we say we are coding in a specific language, we mean we are instructing the computer with the dictionary of commands the language provides. The computer will interpret these commands and convert them into binary instructions that its specific hardware understands.

The language we'll be using is called **JavaScript**. JavaScript is very powerful but relatively easy to learn. It's a language that powers the web and is one of the world's most popular. Many websites and applications, such as Google Docs, Hotmail, and Coursera, make extensive use of JavaScript.

## Libraries and p5.js

Along with JavaScript, we'll make extensive use of the library called **p5.js**.

A **library** is a collection of code written by someone else that we can use in our programs. By using a library, we avoid something programmers call **reinventing the wheel**. This means we do not need to write a lot of boilerplate code just to make our programs work. Libraries such as p5.js are a vital part of modern coding and allow us to develop more complicated programs.

**p5.js** is designed for beginners to get into coding and focus on the important parts of a program. It helps you make graphical JavaScript applications and animations. Using p5.js is a lot of fun, and you can see in a visual way what your code is doing and how programming works.

A good place to start learning about p5.js is the project's web page. Let's take a look at the website now.

## Resources

- [P5.js homepage](https://p5js.org/)
- [p5.js examples](https://p5js.org/examples/)
- [p5.js reference](https://p5js.org/reference/)
- [p5.js library](https://p5js.org/libraries/)
- [p5.js community](https://p5js.org/community/)
- [p5.js forum](https://p5js.org/forum/)
- [p5.js chat](https://p5js.org/chat/)
- [p5.js documentation](https://p5js.org/documentation/)