---
id: 3348743f-9804-4dd3-9241-24c1b90fce93
type: lecture
created: 2026-01-06
updated: 2026-01-06
title: Running your first program with Visual Studio Code
lesson: Lesson 1.1 Introduction to p5.js
unit: Topic 1. Your development environment
course: CM1005 Introduction to Programming I
certificate: BSc Computer Science
url: https://www.coursera.org/learn/uol-introduction-to-programming-1/lecture/GnPgX/running-your-first-program-with-visual-studio-code
tags:
  - p5js
aliases:
related:
---

# Introduction

Hello, there. You might be wondering, who's this guy now? Fair question to you. My name is Andrea, and I'm a learning technologist here at Goldsmiths, University of London.

My role essentially is to work in the background to make sure that the majority of the learning activities are actually working for this BSc Computer Science online degree. As well as that, I'm also a full-time PhD candidate in Computer Science here at Goldsmiths, and my research is looking at the integration of video games and online learning.

I've actually designed a bunch of game-based learning activities for you to try in later modules. But the main reason why I'm here, and you will find me here and there for the remainder of the course, is to provide you with some updated content for this module, as well as looking at some of the latest features of the JavaScript programming language.

# Moving to Visual Studio Code

Now, we will start by looking at a new coding editor called Visual Studio Code. Initially, when we launched this module, Brackets was a very, very popular coding editor. But as you know, technology moves really fast. Today, Visual Studio Code is possibly one of the most popular coding editors out there, especially for web development and for people programming in JavaScript. Now, it's also very important for you to know Visual Studio Code because this is the coding editor that you will be using in future modules for this degree.

# What We’ll Cover in This Lecture

Just very quickly about this lecture. We're first going to download and install Visual Studio Code together. Then we will take a look at some of the basics, some of the components, essentially, that make the Visual Studio Code editor interface. Finally, we will run together your first program using Visual Studio Code, and we will discover that we need something called a local server, which is an extension that you can add to Visual Studio Code to run your program in a web browser.

---

## Downloading and Installing Visual Studio Code

First thing's first: download and install. Let's go together to the website and do this. As you can see, I am in the main web page of the Visual Studio Code website, and this should be relatively easy for you to do.

The only thing you have to do, you have to click on this big button here to download your version of Visual Studio Code. Now, I am on a Mac machine, so the Mac Universal version would work for me. If you are on Windows, you simply select the Windows version. And same if you're on Linux, there is also a Linux version for you to download.

Please go ahead, download it and follow all the instructions for the installation process. Now, once you've done it, it should appear for you as an application. It looks like this, and all you have to do is click on it, and this should open as a window on your desktop.

---

# Exploring Visual Studio Code Components

Now, back to the slides, and we will take a look at some of the main components of this new coding editor. Great. You've downloaded Visual Studio Code, you've installed it.

Let's take a look together at some of the main components that make the Visual Studio Code interface. There are really three main ones that you need to know:

## 1. The Side Bar

As you can see here, on the left hand side, you have something called the side bar. This is essentially the place where you can put all of your files. It’s where you structure your project. You can add in folders, you can add in files, and it's essentially the place where you put all of your files into one place.

## 2. The Editor

The middle part is the editor. This is probably the part that you would be using the most as a programmer, and essentially is the place where you can write your code. As you can see here, this is JavaScript code that prints "Hello Visual Studio Code" to the console. It's very simple, but this would be the place where you can write the code.

## 3. Panels

Additionally, at the bottom, you have a section called panels. Panels are just additional components that you can customize and add to your editor. For example, you can see there that you can access the terminal within this coding editor, which I think it's great.

You've downloaded it now. You know what the main components are. The very next task for us is to run our first program with it.

---

# Installing the Live Server Extension

But there is one thing we need to do first, and this is we have to install a local server extension. Now, this is the equivalent of the lightning button that you can find in Brackets.

Unfortunately, Visual Studio Code doesn't come with a built-in button that does that, so we need to install it ourselves.

Let's go back to the coding editor and install the local server extension first, and then we will run our first program together.

## How to Install the Live Server Extension

Brilliant, so I am back to the coding editor. The first thing we need to do is install the Live Server extension.

1. The first thing you want to do is click on the Extension icon on the left hand side tab.
2. You want to search for "live server".
3. Once you search for it, it should be the very first one that appears in your list.
4. Click on the Live Server extension, and you simply want to click on the Install button just right below the title of the extension.
5. Click on it, and this should install the live server extension.

Now, do you get a confirmation of it? Well, if you look at the very bottom, you should see a new button appearing, which says "Go Live". That's a confirmation that the Live Server extension was installed correctly. Brilliant.

---

# Running Your First Program

The next thing is we want to run our first program.

1. First of all, download it from the Resources section of this lecture.
2. Unzip it first — it will download with the name of `sketch.zip`.
3. What you want to do is double click on it. If you're on a Mac, simply decompress it.

You can see that this folder has essentially three files in it:

- **index.html** – This is the structure of the web page.
- **p5.js** – This is the library that contains all the functionalities for the p5 library itself.
- **sketch.js** – This is the program that was written using some of the p5.js functionalities.

## Opening and Trusting the Folder

To run this, it is very simple. The first thing you want to do is simply drag the folder into the coding editor. Drag and drop it in. It might tell you that you need to trust the authors for this folder to be open.

That's safe enough. Always make sure that you review the code when you download code from a website, but for this, you can trust it. I'm doing it with you, so you can trust me. Click on "Yes".

As you can see now, on the left hand side, we have this sketch folder open with the three files in there.

- This is the HTML.
- You can quickly take a look, if you want, at the p5.js library. This is all the code that contains all the functionality for the p5.js library.
- Also, you have the sketch.js, which is the program that we will run now using the Live Server extension that we just installed.

---

# Going Live!

Now, all you have to do is click on the "Go Live" button at the bottom over here. Go ahead and click on that. It will take a few seconds.

Now, you can see that our code is actually up and running on a web browser.

The beauty of it is that, let's say we want to change, for instance, the color of this inside rectangle. We can change the color to, for example, black. When you save, this is updated automatically in your browser. This is absolutely brilliant.

You can see how easy it is to import a folder and simply run p5.js sketches using the Live Server extension.

---

# Wrap Up

Now, back to the slides for a quick wrap up. Lovely.

In this lecture, you've learned about Visual Studio Code. You've learned how to download it, install it, and we actually saw together how you can run your first p5.js sketch, installing also the Live Server extension.

That's everything for this lecture. I'm looking forward to seeing you at some point in this module.
