---
id: 7f74a8dc-ab58-4c6f-b92f-12cedddf448a
type: lecture
created: 2026-01-06
updated: 2026-01-06
title: Built-in events - mousePressed, keyPressed
lesson: Lesson 3.1 Variables, objects and interaction
unit: Topic 3 Variables, objects and interaction
course: CM1005 Introduction to Programming I
certificate: BSc Computer Science
url: https://www.coursera.org/learn/uol-introduction-to-programming-1/lecture/XWUgW/built-in-events-mousepressed-keypressed
aliases:
related:
---


# Built-in Events: `mousePressed` and `keyPressed`

In this video, we're going to be looking at more common events. If you go back to the "follows up" application we made last time, you should see a white spot that follows the mouse cursor around. We're going to extend this program now so that the spot changes color when the user clicks the mouse.

## Adding the `mousePressed` Event

We can do this by adding another function. We start with the word `function`, which tells p5 and JavaScript that we're creating a new function. This one is called `mousePressed`. Then, we put two parentheses after the function name, followed by curly brackets where we will put our code.

It is very important that you call this function `mousePressed`, spelled exactly like this with a capital "P". This way, p5 will know where to look for it when the user clicks the mouse.

Inside this function, we're going to change the fill from all white to a red color (255, 0, 0). 

## Fixing a Common Issue

If we do this and run the code, we might have a problem. The spot won't change color when the button is pressed. That’s because there's also a `fill` in `draw`, so each frame it gets reset to white.

So, even though the mouse is being pressed and it should be changing color, we're not seeing it because it happens for such a brief period of time. To fix this, we need to take the `fill` out of `draw` and put it into `setup`. Make sure to use neat indentation.

Now, when you refresh and press the mouse, the spot changes to red and will stay red.

## Another User Event: `keyPressed`

Let’s look at one more user event. We’ve covered `mousePressed`, so now let’s look at `keyPressed`.

Again, we use `function` to tell JavaScript that we are writing a new function named `keyPressed`, with a capital "P".

This is called camel casing. Notice how the function name starts with a small letter, and then for a new word, even though it would be a space, we use a capital letter instead.

Inside the curly braces, set the fill to yellow (RGB: 255, 255, 0). Don’t forget to include the semi-colon at the end.

## Testing

Save and run the code. As you move the mouse, the spot is white. When you click, it goes red. If you press the space bar, it changes to yellow.

---

Try this yourself and experiment with different colors or interactions when the mouse is pressed or a key is pressed.
