---
id: 3ea18d69-b184-43a8-b7cf-944536382bf4
type: lecture
created: 2026-01-06
updated: 2026-01-06
title: Objects
lesson: Lesson 3.2 User-defined variables and objects
unit: Topic 3 Variables, objects and interaction
course: CM1005 Introduction to Programming I
certificate: BSc Computer Science
url: https://www.coursera.org/learn/uol-introduction-to-programming-1/lecture/6TAKV/objects
aliases:
related:
---

### Storing Individual Values with Variables

So far, we've been using variables to store individual values. For example: tree posects, cloud posects. However, when you start accumulating lots of variables, there's a neater way of dealing with this — by using **objects**.

### Introducing Objects

I'm going to show you how to use objects now. In this sketch, I currently have lots of variables for my tree: the x-position, the trunkHeight, the trunkWidth, and one for the radius.

A clue that we could combine these values into a single object is that I've used the word “tree” in front of each of them.

### Declaring and Initializing an Object

The first step is to declare and initialize a tree object. This is similar to how I've made other variables: I type the `var` keyword, and I call this object “tree.” The next thing to do is initialize it in the setup function.

The syntax is slightly different. I type `tree =` and then use two curly braces `{}` to make an empty object, followed by a semicolon.

### Adding Properties to the Object

The next step is to add properties. I add one property for each of the original variables, generally just using the second part of the name. For example, I start with `pos_x`. After naming the property, I put a colon (that’s the two dots on top of each other), and then set an initial value for it. In this case, I might use `256` as before.

To add the second property, I separate items with a comma. For example, I add `trunkHeight` and set an initial value. Again, I'd need a comma before the next property. I continue this for each property.

A useful thing to keep in mind: don’t put a comma after the last property. Commas are only used to separate the different properties.

### Using Object Properties in Code

Now it’s time to use these properties in our drawing code. I’ll start by doing this manually with one property. 

If I see `treePos_x` in my code, I want to replace it with the `pos_x` property from my tree object. To do this, I delete `treePos_x` and type `tree`, then use the dot to access a property. As soon as I type the dot, brackets is helpful and offers me a list of the different properties. I choose `pos_x` from the list.

I could repeat this for all my variables, but it’s slow and can lead to mistakes. A better approach is to use **Find and Replace** in the editor.

### Using Find and Replace

Now, I go up to Find and choose “Replace” from the menu. First, I replace any instance of `treePos_x` with `tree.pos_x`, like this. I do this manually because I don’t want to replace the variable declarations. For example, I only want to replace instances where I’m using the variable, not when it’s being declared or initialized.

After finishing with `pos_x`, I go ahead and do the same for `trunkHeight`. I select the relevant code and replace it with `tree.trunkHeight`. Again, I carefully go through one by one to ensure I’m only replacing the right occurrences.

I repeat this process for the remaining properties. 

### Cleaning Up and Organizing the Code

Now, my object is finished. The tree looks exactly the same as before, which means everything works. At this point, I can safely delete the old variable declarations and initializations associated with the tree. After cleaning up, everything still behaves the same, but my code is much cleaner and better organized.

### Modifying Properties

Now, if I want to change features, I can directly modify the relevant properties of the object. For example, I can set the x-position to a different value, change the trunk height, or increase the radius of the leaves. I can also change the trunk width.

### When to Use Objects

A good rule of thumb for when to use objects instead of just individual variables is this: all the different variables you’re working with actually describe the same entity. In this case, it's a tree.

However, it wouldn’t make sense to combine the tree and cloud into a single object, as they are different entities.

Another hint that it’s a good idea to use an object is when you notice you’ve prefixed all your variables with the same word, like `cloudPos_x`, `cloudSize`, `treePos_x`, `treeThis`, and so on. When that happens, it’s probably a good idea to group those into an object.

