---
id: 6842bc7e-a89d-4d79-9261-1af108899f18
type: lecture
created: 2026-01-06
updated: 2026-01-06
title: Inspecting variables in the console
lesson: Lesson 3.3 Working with variables
unit: Topic 3 Variables, objects and interaction
course: CM1005 Introduction to Programming I
certificate: BSc Computer Science
url: https://www.coursera.org/learn/uol-introduction-to-programming-1/lecture/g0h9r/inspecting-variables-in-the-console
aliases:
related:
---


## Inspecting Variable Values in the Console

Now that we understand a bit about how variables work, it's useful to be able to inspect their values in the console.

### Adding Variables to the Sketch

If we return to our original template for the "follow spots" sketch from a previous video, we can add some variables to it. Let's say:

- `var spotX = 200`
- `var spotY = 200`

If we use these variables for the X and Y values of the ellipse (that is, using `spotX` and `spotY`), and then save the sketch, you'll see the spot move a little bit towards the top left corner.

### Using Variables to Position the Ellipse

Now, we're using `spotX` and `spotY` values to position our ellipse. To view these values in the console, we can use the `console.log` command. This command prints out whatever we write inside the brackets to the browser console.

For example, try logging `spotX` in the console.

To access the console, right-click on the canvas and select "Inspect." Chrome will open its Developer Tools. By selecting the "Console" tab from the list at the top, you can see that every frame—each time the `draw` function is called—it's printing out "200 tests" (or the current value of `spotX`).

### Making Console Output More Useful

We can make this output a bit more informative. If we put a string in quotes at the start of our log statement, we can provide context about the value:

For example:  
Put `"spotX is "` (with a space) in quotes, and then use a plus sign (`+`) before the variable name. This tells JavaScript to add the value of `spotX` to the string. 

When we save and run this, you'll see:  
"The spotX is 200" printed in the console.

At this point, this information may not seem very useful, since the value never changes and is explicitly set. However, as your programs become more complex, this technique becomes more valuable.

### Inspecting Changing Values

To demonstrate this further, try changing `spotX` and `spotY` to `mouseX` and `mouseY`. Remember, these are built-in variables from p5.js that tell you the current position of the mouse cursor on the screen. Now, change the output to log the variable `mouseX`.

Let’s update the message to say, "the mouse is X" and include a space for clarity. Now, when you move your mouse around the screen, go back to the console and you will see whole numbers representing the current position of the mouse on the screen.

This is a simple introduction to inspecting the value of your variables in the console.
