---
id: 6842bc7e-a89d-4d79-9261-1af108899f18
type: lecture
created: 2026-01-06
updated: 2026-01-06
title: Code philosophy - the elegant coder
lesson: Lesson 3.4 Code philosophy - The Elegant Coder
unit: Topic 3 Variables, objects and interaction (cont.)
course: CM1005 Introduction to Programming I
certificate: BSc Computer Science
url: https://www.coursera.org/learn/uol-introduction-to-programming-1/lecture/K6c0Y/code-philosophy-the-elegant-coder
aliases:
related:
---

# Code Philosophy: The Elegant Coder

This week's code philosophy is about writing elegant code. Coders don't just care about what their programs do—they care about how their programs do it. Just as mathematicians search for elegance in their solutions, coders aim to write elegant code.

## What Is Elegant Code?

But, what is elegant code? Is elegant code concise?

The artist and musician Fredrik Olofsson produces tweet-length fragments of code that generate intricate music such as you're hearing now. It really is quite remarkable to think that these 240 characters produced this music. Such work is a masterclass in concision, but whilst it's great art, coders would not call it elegant.

Is elegant code clever? The code on the left produces the maze game on the right. The visual maze rendered by the white space in the code, and the maze in the game, are one and the same. This is the winning entry from the 2004 obfuscated C competition. Here, programmers compete to create the most dastardly and tortuously clever code in the language C. Now, whilst this program is certainly masterful and clever, it would fail any program's test for elegance.

## Simplicity and Readability

Antoine Saint-Exupery said, "Perfection is achieved, not when there is nothing more to add, but when there's nothing left to take away." So, elegant code is as simple as it can be. Elegant code is readable. Coders aim for well-named variables, good use of objects, logical organization, and explanatory comments.

Redundancy, on the other hand, is not elegant. Coders try to avoid commented out blocks of unused code, unused variables, and drawn images that can't be seen.

## Following Conventions

Elegant code also follows conventions. Coders make sure that they align brackets and that they indent the code between those brackets. When lines get very long, coders often break things onto separate lines. Coders like to use comments, but have to find a consistent way to plan their work.

## The Path to Elegance

Now, of course, there's much more to writing elegant code than these rules alone, and as your knowledge develops, so will your sense of what is elegant code. These guidelines give you a good start. It takes some practice to use them consistently.

So, try to be elegant in every line of code that you write, no matter how trivial.

**This week's mantra is: always be an elegant coder.** 
