---
id: 7c921c9b-0640-4434-bd67-49174409cbcd
type: lecture
created: 2026-01-07
updated: 2026-01-07
title: Conditional statements using ==
lesson: Lesson 4.1 Conditional logic
unit: Topic 4 Conditionals and variable types
course: CM1005 Introduction to Programming I
certificate: BSc Computer Science
url: https://www.coursera.org/learn/uol-introduction-to-programming-1/lecture/hXeoQ/conditional-statements-using
aliases:
related:
---


# The Jacquard Loom and Programmable Machines

The Jacquard loom, which you can see behind me, is important in the history of computing because it's one of the first programmable machines. It was used to mass-produce intricately woven textiles.

Now, so far, our programs have not been much more advanced than a Jacquard loom. They can draw the same image many times on demand. They may even have adjustable elements, but they can't make decisions for themselves. They have no internal logic. They're still dumb machines, no smarter than your average lawnmower.

# Introducing Conditional Logic

So, in this topic, we're going to learn how to make our programs a little bit more intelligent. We're going to write programs that can take decisions. To do this, we're going to use conditional statements.

This is the basic syntax of a conditional statement: between the round parentheses is where the condition goes, and the condition is something that can either be true or false. Between the curly braces is where the action goes. If the condition is true, then the action happens—otherwise, nothing happens.

# Examples of Conditions and Actions

Conditions can be things like:

- "Is the weather hot?"
- "My shirt is green"
- "My age is 39"
- "There's no coffee left in the cupboard"

The thing these all have in common is that they're true or false statements. For example:

- "The weather is hot" – that's true.
- "My shirt isn't green" – that's false.
- "My age is 39" – that's true.
- "There's no coffee left in the cupboard" – actually, there's plenty of coffee, so that's false.

Actions can be pretty much anything that you want, but they normally relate to the condition somehow. For example:

- "Drink some water because it's hot"
- "Wear blue trousers to go with your green shirt"
- "Plan a 40th birthday party"
- "Just buy some more coffee"

# The ‘Equals’ Operator in Code

Now, to make conditional statements in code, we need to use the equal to operator, and this is what it looks like: two equals signs next to each other (`==`). The way it works in code is that it simply checks whether one thing equals another thing.

For example, we have a variable `name` and it's been set to "Simon." The condition checks whether `name` equals the string "Simon," and if it does, it's going to print that to the console. So, here's our condition and here is our action.

# An Example: Checking Names

Let's have a look at that in code. Here I have the code example which we can now play with—you can also download this from the platform. As we can see, there are no commands that do any drawing, so we're going to have to check the console in order to see the output.

I'm going to run it right away, and I'll open up the console, and sure enough, we can see that it says, "Hello Simon." If we have a look here, we have a condition that's checking to see if `name` is equal to "Simon." We set `name` to "Simon" here and therefore it prints, "Hello Simon."

We could do a little experiment. We could change this to something that isn't "Simon." How about if we change it to "Sabina"? If we look back at our output, now we see that there is no output, and that's because when we get to this conditional test here, it goes, "Does name equal Simon?" No, it's Sabina. So, this is going to be false. This action won't happen.

# A More Sophisticated Example: The Bomb Diffuser Game

That's a very simple example. I've got a more sophisticated example to show you now, and you can download this again from the platform and code along with me.

We have a bomb diffuser game, and we're going to be working on this a little bit in this series of videos. I'm going to open that in Brackets, and the first thing I'm going to do is run the game and see what we've got.

Here we can see we've got our shaking bomb with a fuse that's lit, and a lot of writing. It's quite clear that this seems to be the entire writing for the game. We don't really want all of this writing to appear at the same time.

# Using Conditional Statements to Manage Game Output

In order to do this, this is where we're going to use some conditional statements. But first, let's actually just look at the code and see what it's doing.

- We have a bunch of global variables declared here. These ones are for where the bomb appears and the size of the bomb.
- There's one for the fuse, and we have a bit of setup code which also initializes those variables.
- Then, usefully, we've got things commented up here.
- We can see that this is where we're adding some random amounts to the center position of the bomb, which is what's creating this wobble.

Here is where we're drawing the fuse, we're drawing the bomb, we're drawing the flame, and then right at the bottom, we've got all the game texts drawn. We have an empty event there, `keyPressed`, which we'll use in a moment.

# Adding Game States

What we want to do is create some game states here, and then we want different graphics to appear according to which game state we're in.

If we think about it, we should have:

- a pregame state,
- a playing-the-game state,
- one for if we've won, and
- one for if we've lost the game.

That's four game states. The way I'm going to do this is I'm going to create a global variable called `gameState`.

I'm going to use numbers here. So I'll initialize `gameState` as zero. Zero is the pregame, we'll call it. 

We need to think about what we want to appear in the pregame. In the pregame, we want the message "Press any key to start." So, I'm going to go down to the text, and I'm going to create a conditional statement here: 

- if `gameState == 0`, then we are in the pregame.

What's the action going to be? The action is going to be "Press any key to start." At the moment, we won't really see any difference because we haven't written any other conditional statements, and yes, we're in the pregame.

# Testing Game State Changes

If we want to test this, there's a neat way of doing it. I now have a variable called `gameState`, which I can check in the console. By just typing `gameState`, you can see I get the output zero.

I can now change this. I could make `gameState` equal to one. If `gameState` is equal to one (which will be playing the game), you can see the "Press any key to start" text has now disappeared. If I set it back to zero, it reappears.

In `gameState` one, we'll want the bomb to be shaking. But we won't want it to shake at any other time, so we won't want it to shake in the pregame or after you've won or lost. Here, I can also add some conditional statements to make this happen.

# Conditional Behavior for Bomb Animation

This is the bit that wobbles the bomb, and I only want it to happen if it's `gameState` one. So, I'm going to type another conditional statement: If `gameState == 1`, then we shake the bomb. I'll cut and paste that into there and make sure that my indentations are good.

Now, we can see we're in `gameState` zero and the bomb isn't shaking. If I set it to `gameState` one, the bomb starts shaking. The other thing that should only appear in `gameState` one is the flame on the fuse.

Let's look at where that happens in the code. Here we are: draw the flame. I can do the same thing here: If `gameState == 1`, perform the action to draw the flame. I've got my action there, so I'll carefully cut and paste that into the action. We have a few problems with indentation, so I'll fix that as well.

That looks good. Let's test it again. Now we can see there's no flame. I set `gameState` to one, and the bomb started shaking, and the flame is lit.

# Adding More Conditional Statements for Text

The other thing that we only want to appear in `gameState` one is the instruction, "Press a key to defuse the bomb." So, I'm going to go down here and add one more conditional statement: If `gameState == 1`, that's when we draw this text.

Now our game is starting to look like it makes sense. We press any key to start. When we start the game, we get the instructions.

# Handling Game Over and Winning Conditions

The last two bits we need to deal with are this "Game over" and "You won" text.

- "Game over" will be `gameState` two—that's when you've lost the game. I'm going to put that condition here:
  - If `gameState == 2`, that's when we do "Game over."
- Now, we're almost there. I'm just going to deal with the condition "You won." That's `gameState` three:
  - If `gameState == 3`, we print "You won."

Now, if I just show you all the different states:

- We've got zero, that's the pregame.
- Set it to one, and we're playing the game.
- Set it to two as if we lost the game.
- Set it to three if we won the game.

# Changing the Game State with Keyboard Events

We have that done, but what I also want to do is start looking at actually how to change the `gameState` in the program.

What I'm going to do is write a series of conditional statements in `keyPressed` to flip through the game states. So, I'm going to say: 

- When you press a key, 
  - If `gameState == 0`, then `gameState` should equal one.
  - If `gameState == 1`, then `gameState` will equal two.
    - (We're just going to assume for the moment that you always lose the game.)
  - If `gameState == 2`, then we're going to go back to the start of the game, so `gameState` equals zero.
  - We can also do one for `gameState` three here as well.

# Observing a Problem with State Changes

There's actually a problem with this. We'll try it out, but you'll see it might not behave as we expected.

So here we are. I'm going to press any key to start. Whoops, I'll select that. It doesn't seem to work. But actually, something is happening.

Let me talk you through it. I press the key. Well, `gameState` equals zero, so okay, I'll set `gameState` equal to one. And then it said `gameState` equals one. Yes, it does, so I'll set `gameState` to two. Then it went, well, `gameState` does equal two, so I'll set `gameState` back to zero.

There we go. We've just gone through this whole loop all in one go, and we never saw any change. This is obviously not what we want. This is a mistake that's quite easy to make with conditional statements. There are quite a few ways of solving this.

# A Solution: Using an Intermediate State Variable

I am going to show you one for the moment, and it's a really simple one. We're going to make another variable, and I'm going to call it `newState`.

What I'm going to do is, instead of setting `gameState` in each of these cases, I'm going to set `newState`. There we are: `newState`, `newState`, `newState`, and one more. Then, right at the end of my `keyPressed` event, I'm just going to set `gameState` to whatever `newState` had become. This means that the actions here don't trigger anything to do with the following conditions. It's just a safe way to change variables.

It's a good rule of thumb: you shouldn't really change in a series of conditional statements the variable that you're actually testing.

# Testing the Improved Game State Logic

If we try this out now, we should find that it works. I'm going to press any key to start. Brilliant. I'm going to press any key to defuse the bomb, and then it's game over.

That's it. Have a play with the code yourself. Make sure that you understand it before moving onto the next video.
