---
id: 5b6bdef9-6c10-4b66-9ee5-76d2b74459a9
type: lecture
created: 2026-01-18
updated: 2026-01-18
title: Code philosophy - the debugger's mindset
lesson: Lesson 4.3 Debugging techniques
unit: Topic 4 Conditionals and variable types
course: CM1005 Introduction to Programming I
certificate: BSc Computer Science
url: https://www.coursera.org/learn/uol-introduction-to-programming-1/lecture/Mb658/code-philosophy-the-debuggers-mindset
---


# The Debugger's Mindset

This week's code philosophy is called the debugger's mindset. We've already been doing some debugging, but let's think about bugs in more detail. Bugs happen at all stages in a coder's career. In fact, coders actually spend more time debugging than they do writing code. Debugging requires you to change perspectives. 

When you're coding, you are like an architect: imagining, planning, and building your code. When you're debugging, however, you become more like a detective, observing, experimenting, and learning about your problem.

## The First Stage: Relax

Unfortunately, the point at which you need to start debugging is also when you are least likely to be able to change perspectives. This brings us to the first stage of debugging: **relax**. It's easy to slip into debugging without realizing it. You're better off taking a break before you start. Take a deep breath. Make a cup of tea. Perhaps go for a walk, or if it's late, go to bed.

## Read the Error

The next stage is to read the error. Many people forget to read the error message. Open the console and, for each error, check the line number and look at it in your code. If there are keywords you don't understand, google them.

## Check the Basics

Before we go any further, let's check the basics:
- Are you running and editing the same version of your code?
- Have you loaded all the assets?
- Do you need to simply refresh the browser?

## Syntax, Arguments, and Variables

If it's not a basic problem, check your syntax, arguments, and variables:
- Have you spelled all the commands and variables correctly?
- Are you missing brackets?
- Are you providing the correct arguments for every command?
- Have you defined and initialized all of your variables?

## Define the Problem Clearly

If it's still not resolved, you have a more complex problem. The next stage is to define your problem clearly. Try writing a letter to an imaginary friend, saying something like, "When I do x, y happens." Often, this process will reveal the bug.

Sometimes, you may discover you have multiple bugs. If so, pick out one and start working on that one.

## Tidy and Explain Your Code

Messy code causes bugs, so the next stage is to tidy and explain your code. Write comments explaining how your code works. Replace any "magic numbers" with variables. Sort out all of your indentations. This will reveal missing brackets and any code that is in the wrong bracket block.

## Review Recent Changes

Next, consider what you just changed in your code. Every change is a potential source of a bug, and your most recent change may be the source of the problem.

## Use Print Statements

Another technique is to print out values to the console. This helps you understand what your program is doing as it runs. Only print out a couple of values at a time, though, as the console can become overcrowded quickly.

## Back Up Before Modifying

If you still haven't found the bug and you're about to change your code, be careful: this can cause damage. Save a backup copy right away.

## Change and Test One Thing at a Time

Now you're ready to change the code. Only do this after all the previous steps. Change only one thing at a time, and then test to see if it fixes the bug. If it didn't fix the bug, change your code back right away.

In the previous video, Edward talks about isolation and commenting as techniques for discovering bugs. Start by using these.

## Take a Break and Get Perspective

Despite your best efforts and several hours, you may still not be getting anywhere. It's time for another break. After much coding and debugging, you might not be thinking straight. Perhaps work on another aspect of your program. Sometimes, adding additional code will uncover the source of the problem. Talk things through with a friend or even try starting from scratch with a different approach. Perhaps you took the wrong path in the first place.

## The Key to Good Debugging

Debugging takes many years to master, but the key to good debugging is to enjoy the process. When you finally solve your problem, you'll experience a combination of joy, achievement, and relief. You'll also have learned something valuable.

**The mantra from this week's code philosophy is: time spent debugging is never time wasted.**
