---
id: b14c81ad-cb98-4c37-b997-96397520b70c
type: lecture
created: 2025-11-09
updated: 2025-11-09
title: RGB (red, green and blue) colours
lesson: Lesson 2.1 Drawing Functions
unit: Topic 2 Drawing in 2D
course: CM1005 Introduction to Programming I
certificate: BSc Computer Science
url: https://www.coursera.org/learn/uol-introduction-to-programming-1/lecture/sf1qh/rgb-red-green-and-blue-colours
tags:
aliases:
related:
---

# Exploring 16,777,216 Colors

In this video, I'm going to show you 16,777,216 colors. We're going to start with my favorite color, gray. I have a code example prepared to demonstrate this.

## The Background Command

The first thing I need to explain is the background command. The background command does two things:
- It clears the background of any images that are already on the canvas.
- It sets the background color.

At the moment, the argument here is `255`, which will set the background color to white.

If I want to set the background color to black, I can just change this value to `0`. If I want to get a grey, all I need to do is choose a value somewhere between zero and 255. For example:

- Setting the value to `100` gives a quite dark grey.
- Using `150` makes it a little bit lighter.

### Why Zero to 255?

Now, the question is: why are we using values between zero and 255? This might seem a little strange.

This comes down to how computers store values in their memory. Computers have lots of little switches in their memory called **bits**. Bits can only have one of two values: a one or a zero. Bits are arranged into groups of eight switches called **bytes**.

So, in this image, all the switches might be set "on," so all the values are one. But how many possible combinations can we get out of eight switches? We could have:
- This combination,
- Another random combination,
- Or all zeros,
- And so on.

In total, the number of combinations is 2 to the power of 8 (2 × 2 × 2 × 2 × 2 × 2 × 2 × 2). When we do that calculation, we get 256. That means eight bits of information give us 256 possible values.

In computing, we never start from the number one; we always start from zero. That means that one byte of information allows us to have values starting at zero and going up to 255. This is why we use the values between zero and 255.

## Beyond Grayscale: Producing Colors

We can go further than just working with shades of grey—we can produce lots of different colors. 

Currently, our background command uses a single argument, but we can actually use three arguments. I can add two extra values, so, for the moment, let's set them all to 150. This still gives us gray.

When we use three arguments, these stand for **red**, **green**, and **blue**.

- For example, set green and blue to zero, and set red to 255: you'll get a **red background**.
- Do the same for green: you'll get a **green background**.
- Try it with blue: you'll get a **blue background**.

### Adjusting Color Intensity

Next, we can create different intensities of those colors.

- For a much darker red, use 150 for the red value—you'll get a nice rusty red.
- The same works for green: lowering the value will give a darker green.

## Mixing Colors: Primary and Secondary Colors

We can also make secondary colors by mixing red, green, and blue together.

- Mixing 255 of red with 255 of green gives **yellow**.
- Mixing 255 of red with 255 of blue gives **purple** (magenta).
- Mixing 255 of green with 255 of blue gives a **turquoise** color (sometimes called cyan).

Here is a summary of some combinations:

- 255 of all three (red, green, blue): **White**
- 255 just in red: **Red**
- 255 just in green: **Green**
- 255 just in blue: **Blue**
- 255 of red and blue together: **Magenta**
- 255 of red and green together: **Yellow**
- 255 of green and blue together: **Cyan**
- Zero of all values: **Black**

But we can go beyond these by mixing our own colors. For example, to get **orange** (which is similar to yellow), start with 255 and 255 for red and green (yellow), then reduce the green to get orange.

Or, to get **pink**, start with red and make it a little bit lighter by increasing the other two values evenly.

You can experiment by mixing your own colors in this way.

## How Many Colors Are Possible?

How do we get to that big number I mentioned at the beginning? Let's look at how many colors we can create.

We use the same idea as with bits and bytes to figure out the number of possible color combinations. Each of red, green, and blue can have 256 possible values, so we do the sum: 256 to the power of 3.

- That is, 256 × 256 × 256 = 16,777,216 possible colors.

So, you have all of these colors to play with!

## RGB and Other Color Spaces

We call this the **RGB color space**. There are other color spaces as well, such as HSV or CMYK, but we're not going to review those right now.

It's fun to develop your own colors and experiment, but it can be tricky to find exactly the shade you want. Luckily, there are lots of really good online tools to help you.

## Online Tools for Picking Colors

I've picked one to show you: [rapidtables.com](https://www.rapidtables.com/).

- You can move a pointer to get different shades and see the RGB values.
- You can pick a color directly from the charts.
- There's also a long list of different shades to choose from.

---

That's it for RGB colors! Have a play yourself—experiment with the background command and create your own colors.
