---
id: 786470e0-e968-4703-926d-0614b884ff9d
type: lecture
created: 2025-11-09
updated: 2025-11-09
title: How to access and use the console to view errors
lesson: Lesson 2.2 The console and debugging
unit: Topic 2 Drawing in 2D
course: CM1005 Introduction to Programming I
certificate: BSc Computer Science
url: https://www.coursera.org/learn/uol-introduction-to-programming-1/lecture/a8ouR/how-to-access-and-use-the-console-to-view-errors
aliases:
related:
---

## Encountering Errors and Using the Console

By now, many of you would have encountered this situation: you've written a whole lot of code, but all you can see is a blank white screen on your canvas. The reason for this is that you probably have an error in your code. It's at this point that we reach for the Console.

The Console is a powerful tool that allows you to see what your program is doing under the hood. In this video, I'm going to show you how to open the Console in three browsers: Chrome, Safari, and Firefox.

---

### Opening the Console in Chrome

Let's start with Chrome. 

1. Go to the **View** menu.
2. Navigate down to **Developer**.
3. Select **JavaScript Console**.

You can see that there is a hotkey as well, which you'll probably learn and use instinctively over time. Once the Console opens, you'll see several tabs: Elements, Console, Sources. There are more tabs that may be hidden. The tab you want to select is **Console**.

---

### Opening the Console in Safari

Next, let's look at Safari. If you haven't enabled the developer menu in Safari, that's the first thing you're going to have to do. Once you've enabled it, you won't have to do it again.

Here's how:

1. Go to the **Safari** menu.
2. Select **Preferences**.
3. Go to the **Advanced** tab.
4. Check the option: **Show Develop menu in menu bar**.

Once you've clicked that, you'll see the **Develop** menu appear in the menu bar. In the Develop menu, go down to **Show JavaScript Console**.

There is a hotkey for this as well, and if you use Safari regularly, you'll gradually get used to using it. Again, you'll see several tabs, but the one you want is the **Console** tab.

---

### Opening the Console in Firefox

Finally, let's look at Firefox.

1. Go to **Tools**.
2. Select **Web Developer**.
3. Click on **Web Console**.

You'll notice a very similar setup here. Choose the **Console** tab.

---

### Diagnosing and Fixing Errors

Let's switch back to Chrome to continue.

Suppose your sketch isn't running. Hopefully, you can see some error messages in your Console. The first message looks relevant: 

> "createCanvas is not defined."

That's strange because I'm sure that `createCanvas` is a command. On closer inspection, there's something wrong with how I wrote `createCanvas`. It turns out I haven't put a capital "C" in "Canvas", and code really is that fussy. 

If I save it now with a capital "C", we’ll see that our sketch appears.

---

So, problem fixed. Fixing errors in this way is called **debugging**, and we're going to look at this in the next video.
